Rewrite how to run ACCESS-ESM1.5 according to feedback from user experience (#1202)
ACCESS-Hive/access-hive.github.io: docs/includes/payu.md

Reviewer: This tip is a bit confusing, for some times/things it figures out model time and for some it doesn't

Reviewer: it = `payu`

- Choose a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The _control_ directory is a _Git_ repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same _control_ directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<local-branch>`. For more information refer to this [_payu_ tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).
- Choose a name for your experiment, `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment. Note that the experiment name will be formed using the _control_ directory's name and this `<local-branch>` name.

Then, you can get the chosen configuration using `payu clone`.
<!--end:get-config-payu-->

<!--start:payu-clone-example-->
<!--This bit expect the host page to define the variables: model, config_example, github_configs, model_type-->
For example, if you want to run an experiment for {{model}} using the configuration *{{config_example}}*. You decide the following:

> - `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, `{{config_example}}`, from the repository, `{{github_configs}}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, `{{config_example}}`, from the [{{ model }} configs]({{github_configs}}) repository.
```

I saw this was reverted back. I felt it better to provide the link instead of printing it out and formatting inline code should be reserved for more code commands

Author: I left it with the URL visible because that's the URL people have to provide to the command. So, in this case, I feel it is better to have the exact URL visible instead of hidden behind some text.

For in-depth information about _payu_, check its [technical documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). 
<!--end:payu-about-->

<!--start:payu-organisation-->
<!--This bit expects the host page to define the variables model and model_type-->
### Data organisation and _payu_'s directories designation

!!! tip
    _Payu_ creates all the directories it needs. Therefore, they do not need to be created beforehand.

The data organisation for _payu_ was chosen to separate the smaller text files that define a _configuration_ and the larger binary input and output files needed for an _experiment_. 

This means the _configuration_ definition can be tracked with _Git_, and so is easy to back up and share. It also optimises the use of different filesystems on high-performance computers. Finally, this layout ensures several _experiments_ that share common executables and input data can be run simultaneously.  

A representation of the data organisation for _payu_ is given in the following diagram:

> <!-- Diagram created from Lucid chart: https://lucid.app/users/login#/login -->

Reviewer 3: Suggestion: I would edit the diagram to use a Capital Letter for "Control" and "Laboratory", and also for the start of the sentences within the figure, e.g.,:
"Definition of the configuration...."
"Storage for a user's..."

Author: I've updated the diagram. I found a new online tool that's free and enable to save the xml diagram in the svg image so it will be easier for future editing.

        At the end of a successful run, the model log files are archived to the _archive_ directory and will no longer be found in the _control_ directory. If they remain in the _control_ directory after the PBS job for a run has completed, it means the run has failed.

<!--end:payu-organisation-->

## Prerequisites for _payu_

<!--start:payu-projects-->
    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)
<!--end:payu-projects-->

<!--start:access-payu-->
### Accessing _payu_

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the _payu_ module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version
<!--end:access-payu-->

### Get the model configuration

<!--start:get-config-payu-->
Before downloading (cloning) a local copy of a configuration, you need to:  

- Know the `<repository>` and `<branch>` name of the configuration is stored under on GitHub. 
- Create a location on _Gadi_ to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under `$HOME`. This directory must exist before running _payu_.

> - Choose a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The _control_ directory is a _Git_ repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same _control_ directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<local-branch>`. For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Choose a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The _control_ directory is a _Git_ repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same _control_ directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<local-branch>`. For more information refer to this [_payu_ tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).
```

For example, to run an experiment for 50 years using a configuration with a 1-year _run length_, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `50`:

    payu run -n 50

!!! tip  
    _payu_ has no concept of model time, it is up to the user to determine the `number-of-runs` for the required *total experiment length*.  
    `number-of-runs` should be an integer > 0.<br>  
<!--end:payu-run-experiment-->

<!--start:payu-continue-experiment-->
### Continue an experiment

If you already ran several years of an experiment and you want to simulate some extra years, you can do that easily by using the same _control_ directory as before and simply launching _payu_ again for the extra years. For example, if you had 100 years simulated and want to add 50 years of simulation, you can simply run:

```
payu run -n 50
```

!!! warning

    This only works if you have kept the _archive_ directory as set up by _payu_. If you have modified the _archive_ directory, you will need to manually specify the correct restart file in the `config.yaml` file.
<!--end:payu-continue-experiment-->

<!--start:payu-re-run-experiment-->
### Re-run an experiment from scratch

> If you run an experiment for some years and then realise you have made an error, for example, and want to re-run the same years again, you will need to first remove the _archive_ directory created by _payu_ (move it, rename it, tar it or delete it according to what is appropriate). Then, you can re-launch the experiment using `payu run -n` as previously done.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you run an experiment and then realise you have made an error and would like to re-run the same years again, you will need to first remove the _archive_ directory created by _payu_ (i.e., move it, rename it, tar it or delete it according to what is appropriate). You can then re-launch the experiment using `payu run -n` as done previously.
```

    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.
<!--end:payu-compute-storage-project-->

<!--start:payu-PBS-resources-->
### Modify PBS resources

If the model has been altered and needs more time or memory to complete, you will need to modify the following options in the `config.yaml`:

```yaml
queue: normal
walltime: 3:00:00
mem: 1000GB
jobname: 1deg_jra55_ryf
```

These lines can be edited to change the [PBS directives](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/PBS+Directives+Explained) for the [PBS job][PBS job].
<!--end:payu-PBS-resources-->

<!--start:payu-sync-->
### Syncing output data to long-term storage

The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have not been accessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason, climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer-term storage.<br>
On _Gadi_, this is typically in a folder under a project code on `/g/data`.  

> _payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory _Git_ history to another location.<br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
_Payu_ has built-in support to sync outputs, restarts and a copy of the _control_ directory _Git_ history to another location.<br>
```

    The `name` field, for the model section, is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored or omitted. The `name` field is used for submodels (see below).

    #### `submodels` section {: .no-toc }

    Coupled models may deploy the model components as multiple submodels.

    This section of the _payu_ configuration file specifies the submodels, the configuration options required to execute the model component correctly and the location of all inputs required for this submodel. The configuration files specific to each submodel can be found in a `<name>/` subdirectory of the _control_ directory, where `<name>` is the value of the `name` field in the `submodel` section of `config.yaml`. 

??? info "`runlog` field"

    #### `runlog` field {: .no-toc }

    ```yaml
    runlog: true
    ```

    When running an experiment,  if `runlog` is set to `true`, _payu_ saves a history of the experiment. It does this using _Git_, by automatically committing changes to the control directory repository.

    !!! warning
        This should not be changed as it is an essential part of the provenance of an experiment.<br>

>         _payu_ updates the manifest files for every run, and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the _Git_ history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts, and executables used in an experiment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        _Payu_ updates the manifest files for every run and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the _Git_ history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts and executables used in an experiment.
```

??? info "`userscripts` section"

    #### `userscripts` section {: .no-toc }

>     They are used to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission, for example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    `Userscripts` are used to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission. For example:
```

    - `error` field: script is called if the model does not run correctly and exits with an error.
    - `run` field: script is called after each model run successful execution, but prior to archiving the model output. If using `payu -n` for automatic resubmission, it is run for each submission.
    - `sync` field: script is called at the start of the sync PBS job.
    
    For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#postprocessing).

??? info "`postscript` field"

    #### `postscript` field {: .no-toc }

>     Postprocessing scripts that run after _payu_ has completed all steps of each run. For example, with `payu run -n 10`, the postscript will run 10 times. Scripts that might alter the output directory, for example, can be run as postscripts. These run in PBS jobs separate from the main model simulation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Postprocessing scripts run after _payu_ has completed all steps of each run. For example, with `payu run -n 10`, the postscript will run 10 times. Scripts that might alter the output directory, for example, can be run as postscripts. These run in PBS jobs separate from the main model simulation.
```

??? info "Fields that should never require changing"

    #### Miscellaneous {: .no-toc }

    The following configuration settings should never require changing:

    ```yaml
    stacksize: unlimited
    qsub_flags: -W umask=027
    ```
<!--end:payu-advance-options-->

<!--start:payu-collate-->
#### Collate {: .no-toc }

Rather than outputting a single diagnostic file over the whole model horizontal grid, the ocean component [MOM](/models/model_components/ocean/#modular-ocean-model-mom) typically generates diagnostic outputs as tiles, each of which spans a portion of model grid.

> The `collate` section in the `config.yaml` file controls the process that combines these smaller files into a single outputfile.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `collate` section in the `config.yaml` file controls the process that combines these smaller files into a single output file.
```

![payu directory structure](/assets/payu_directory_structure.svg){: class="example-img" loading="lazy"}

As shown in the diagram, the general layout of a _payu_-supported model run consists of two main directories:

- The _control_ directory contains the model configuration and is the directory from which the model run is started. This directory contains information to manage the simulation and the scientific options that define the algorithms used in the model component or the diagnostics saved by the model component. In the _control_ directory, you will find:

     - `config.yaml` file: it is used to orchestrate the simulation.
     - model components' configuration files:
         - if the model has only one component: these files are located directly in the _control_ directory 
         - if the model has several components: these files are in subdirectories. The `submodels` section of the `config.yaml` file specifies the name of the submodels and of the subdirectories containing the pertinent files.
       
            To modify the model components' options, please refer to the configurations documentation of the model.

> - The _laboratory_ directory contains all data from _payu_ experiments of the same model. By default, it is `/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/<model_name>`. `$PROJECT` and `$USER` are environment variables on _Gadi_ that points to your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) and your username respectively. This location can be changed using options in the `config.yaml` file. Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two subdirectories of particular interest: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The _laboratory_ directory contains all data from _payu_ experiments of the same model. By default, it is `/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/<model_name>`. `$PROJECT` and `$USER` are environment variables on _Gadi_ that point to your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) and your username respectively. This location can be changed using options in the `config.yaml` file. Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two subdirectories of particular interest: 
```

    
    The _archive_ and _work_ directories for an experiment are most easily accessed through the symbolic links created in the _control_ directory.

<!--See the section on [modifying the PBS resources](#modify-pbs-resources) to learn how to change the _laboratory_ location. (Should the include be cut to allow adding this sentence and link?)-->

!!! tip 

    Recommended location of _control_ and _laboratory_ on _Gadi_.

    - _control_ directories: it is recommended to put them in your `$HOME` directory:

        - this is the only filesystem that is actively backed-up. 
        - the quota is small (10GB) but sufficient. The _control_ directory only contains text files and symlinks, and so uses relatively little space (<1MB).

        If you decide to locate your _control_ directory under `/g/data`, be aware of [some complications](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/changing-project-codes-for-payu-control-directories-under-g-data/6566) linked to that choice.

    - _laboratory_ directories: `/scratch` is recommended:

        - optimised for fast reading and writing of large data
        - adequate space available for large model output.

!!! warning

>     Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might be deleted if not accessed for several days. All experiments which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_.

Reviewer 4: This text is from before this PR, but do you think "several days" sound too short? I'm wondering if "some time" plus a link to [the policy](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/156434436/Gadi+scratch+File+Management) could work? Or is "several days" preferable in making sure people are proactive?

#### Output and restart files organisation {: .no-toc}

Within each of the _work_ and _archive_ directories, _payu_ automatically creates a unique subdirectory for each experiment. Within each experiment subdirectory, the output and restart subfolders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`. Model components are further separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

#### Error and output log files {: .no-toc}

*PBS output files*

When the model fails or completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively. These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>
<br/>

> To move these files to the _archive_ directory, use the following commmand:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To move these files to the _archive_ directory, use the following command:
```

    Join the following project by requesting membership on its NCI project page:

<!--start:payu-projects-->
    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)
<!--end:payu-projects-->
    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

    !!! warning
        Different model configurations will likely require you to **join additional projects**. Please refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen model for the list of additional projects.

<!--start:access-payu-->
### Accessing _payu_

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the _payu_ module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version
<!--end:access-payu-->

## Run an experiment

### Get the model configuration

<!--start:get-config-payu-->
Before downloading (cloning) a local copy of a configuration, you need to:  

- Know the `<repository>` and `<branch>` name the configuration is stored under on GitHub. 

> - Create where on Gadi to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under `$HOME`. This directory must exist before running _payu_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Create a location on Gadi to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under `$HOME`. This directory must exist before running _payu_.
```
I think this reads a little smoother but don't have a strong preference

    <terminal-line><span class="spack-cyan">?</span> <span class="payu-red">What would you like to name your new branch</span>  (Note: this won't be shared to the online repository automatically) <span class="payu-dark-yellow">expt1</span></terminal-line>
    <terminal-line><span class="spack-cyan">?</span> <span class="payu-red">Do you want to specify a custom restart path? (If no, the default restart/initial conditions will be used.)</span> <span class="payu-dark-yellow">No</span></terminal-line>
    <terminal-line><span class="payu-yellow">Running command:</span></terminal-line>
    <terminal-line><span class="payu-yellow">\`payu clone -B {{config_example}} -b expt1 {{github_configs}} my-project-expts\`</span></terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Cloned repository from {{github_configs}} to directory: /home/561/\$USER/payu-control/{{model}}/my-project-expts</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Created and checked out new branch: expt1</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>laboratory path:  /scratch/\$PROJECT/\$USER/{{model}}</terminal-line>

>     <terminal-line>binary path:  /scratch/\$PROJECT/\$USER/{{model}}/bin</terminal-line>

Reviewer 4: Perhaps this is too small to worry about. On the ESM1.5 page, these paths become
`/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/ACCESS-ESM1.5/...`

The actual laboratory location when cloning an for ESM1.5 config is instead:
`/scratch/$PROJECT/$USER/access-esm/...`

Author: Good catch. I think I've changed everywhere it's needed but I'll appreciate a second read through on this one.

    <terminal-line>Setting up {{model}}</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Checking exe and input manifests</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updating full hashes for 3 files in manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Creating restart manifest</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

This command: 
  
  - creates the _laboratory_ and _work_ directories based on the experiment configuration
  - generates manifests
  - reports useful information to the user, such as the location of the _laboratory_ where the _work_ and _archive_ directories are located

This can help to isolate issues such as permission problems accessing files and directories, missing files or malformed/incorrect paths.

To test the configuration, execute the following command from within the `control` directory:

    payu run -f

This will submit a single [PBS job][PBS job] to the queue. 

!!! failure
    `payu run` will error out if a non-empty _work_ directory for your experiment already exists (from a failed attempt or from running `payu setup`).<br>

>     The `-f` option to `payu run` lets the model run in all cases and delete any existing data under _work_.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    The `-f` option to `payu run` lets the model run in all cases and deletes any existing data under _work_.
```

<!--end:payu-test-config-->

<!--start:payu-run-experiment-->
### Run the experiment

An experiment consists of a series of sequential runs, with each run continuing from where the previous run ended.

> _payu_ supports automatically running a fixed number of runs using the `-n` option:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_payu_ supports automatically running multiple consecutive runs using the `-n` option:  
```

    payu run -n <number-of-runs>

This will run the configuration `number-of-runs` consecutive times for the configured run length. This way, the *total experiment length* will be `run-length * number-of-runs`. The `run-length` (i.e. the duration of each individual run) is defined in the configuration settings and its specification is model-dependent.

> For example, to run an experiment for a total of 50 years using a configuration with a 1-year _run length_, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `50`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to run an experiment for 50 years using a configuration with a 1-year _run length_, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `50`:
```

>     payu run -n 50

Reviewer: we should try to be clear that this does 50 more runs, not 50 runs from the start of the experiment.

ie. if it crashes after 13 years, then the user would need to do payu run -n 37 to get to 50 

not sure the best way to make that clear

    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;job-name&gt; &lt;\$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>  
    <terminal-line linedelay=0 class="keep-blanks">&lt;job-ID&gt;.gadi-pbs      &lt;job-name&gt; &lt;\$USER&gt;           &lt;time&gt;   R normal-exec</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

The default name of your job is the name of the _payu_ [_control_ directory](#control-directory).<br>
This can be changed by altering the `jobname` in the [PBS resources section](#modify-pbs-resources) of the `config.yaml` file.

_S_ indicates the status of your run, where:

- _Q_ &rarr; Job waiting in the queue to start
- _R_ &rarr; Job running
- _E_ &rarr; Job ending
- _H_ &rarr; Job on hold

If there are no jobs listed with your `jobname` (or if no job is listed), your run either successfully completed or was terminated due to an error.<br>
For more information, check [NCI documentation](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/FAQ+1%3A+Why+My+Jobs+are+NOT+Running).
<!-- old instructtions-->
<!--start:payu-monitor-->

> _payu_ provides the [`payu status`](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage.html#monitoring-payu-jobs) command for monitoring jobs. This command can return the scheduler job ID and the stage the _payu_ run is currently at. When the job is complete, it displays the exit statuses from the model and overall _payu_ run, and points to the PBS log files. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_payu_ provides the [`payu status`](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage.html#monitoring-payu-jobs) command for monitoring jobs. This command returns the scheduler job ID and the stage the _payu_ run is currently at. When the job is complete, it displays the exit statuses from the model and overall _payu_ run, and points to the PBS log files. 
```

!!! note
    `payu status` is available in _payu_ versions `1.2.0` and above. This command does not yet support monitoring post-processing jobs from the configuration (e.g., `payu collate` and `payu sync`).

??? exemple "Example outputs from `payu status`"

    Example output from `payu status` for a running simulation:
    
    ```
        ========================================  
        Run: 8  
          Job ID:            running_example.gadi-pbs  
          Run ID:            xxxx  
          Stage:             model-run  
          Current Expt Time: 1950-10-01T00:00:00  
          Exit Status:       0 (Success)  
          Model Exit Code:   0 (Success)  
          Output Log:        /home/189/USER/expt.o100  
          Error Log:         /home/189/USER/expt.3100  

>           Job File:          /scratch/\$PROJECT/USER/archive/expt-branch—6dhash/payu_jobs/8/run/running_example.gadi-pbs.json  

Reviewer 4: This is just a small point, but "Example output from `payu status` for a running simulation" reads to me like the model run is in progress, while the output
```
          Exit Status:       0 (Success)  
          Model Exit Code:   0 (Success)  
          Output Log:        /home/189/USER/expt.o100  
          Error Log:         /home/189/USER/expt.3100  
```
suggest the run stage has completed. Would it be clearer to remove the four above lines? This would match the output from `payu status` for an in-progress run

Author: I've replaced the example with a truly running example.

# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set base_path below and change to true
    restart: True
    base_path: none # Final sync location will be <base_path>/<experiment_name>/
    exclude:
      - '*.nc.*'
      - 'iceh.????-??-??.nc'
```
To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `base_path` to a location on `/g/data`. _payu_ will copy output and restart folders to `<base_path>/<experiment_name>` to avoid overwriting data from other experiments by mistake. A sensible `base_path` could be: `/g/data/$PROJECT/$USER/<model>`.
<!--end:payu-sync-->

<!--start:payu-restart-prune-->
### Pruning model restarts

By default, restart files are created at the end of each run, allowing subsequent simulations to resume from a previously saved model state. However, restart files can occupy significant disk space, and keeping all of them throughout an entire experiment is often not necessary. 

If disk space is limited, consider using _payu_'s restart files pruning feature, controlled by the `restart_freq` field of the `config.yaml`.
By default, every `restart_freq`, _payu_ removes intermediate restart files, keeping only:

> - the two most recent restarts

Reviewer 4: Is "the two most recent restarts" correct? I'd tested out a run with `restart_freq=4MS`.  At the end of four single month long runs, payu deleted all intermediate restarts:
```
restart000 restart004  restart008  restart012
restart016
```

Before reaching the end of the four month period, it kept all three of the intermediate restarts:
```
restart004 restart008 restart012 restart013 restart014  restart015  
```

Author: This text comes from @Qian-HuiChen , so I'll let her comment here.

Reviewer 5: Hi @blimlim, based on the [payu doc](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/latest/config.html#:~:text=If%20restart_history%20is%20not%20configured%2C%20intermediate%20restarts%20are%20not%20deleted%20until%20a%20permanently%20archived%20restart%20has%20been%20produced.):
```
If ``restart_history`` is not configured, intermediate restarts are not 
   deleted until a permanently archived restart has been produced. 
```
That says unless `restart016` is saved, restart013 through 015 will not be filtered out.

Reviewer 4: Thanks @Qian-HuiChe! Just to confirm should the "the two most recent restarts" line be removed?

Reviewer 5: I would suggest to change it as 
```
By default, every `restart_freq`, _payu_ removes intermediate restart files, keeping only:
- restarts corresponding to the `restart_freq` interval
- all restarts created since the most recently retained restart
```

- restarts corresponding to the `restart_freq` interval

For example, a `restart_freq` set to `1YS` would keep the restart files at the end of each model year, whereas `restart_freq` set to `5YS` would keep those at the end of every fifth model year.
This approach helps reduce disk space while maintaining useful restart points across long experiments, especially useful in case of unexpected crashes.

The `restart_freq` field in the `config.yaml` can either be a number (in which case every _nth_ restart file is retained), or one of the following pandas-style datetime frequencies:

- `YS` &rarr; start of the year
- `MS` &rarr; start of the month
- `D` &rarr; day
- `H` &rarr; hour
- `T` &rarr; minute
- `S` &rarr; second

For example, to preserve the ability to restart the model every 50 model-years, set:
```yaml
restart_freq: '50YS'
```

The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently archived restart file has been produced.

> ??? note "When `restart_freq` is not a multiplier of the model's restart frequency"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
??? note "When `restart_freq` is not a multiple of the model's restart frequency"
```
I think- not 100% sure I'm right here

>     If `restart_freq` is not a multiplier of the model's restart frequency, _payu_ will keep the first restart passed `restart_freq`. For example, a model is set to write restart files every 3 years and produces restarts on the following dates:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    If `restart_freq` is not a multiplier of the model's restart frequency, _payu_ will keep the first restart past `restart_freq`. For example, a model is set to write restart files every 3 years and produces restarts on the following dates:
```

I'm not 100% sure about my suggestion here

Author: According to this: https://www.grammarly.com/blog/commonly-confused-words/past-passed/, you are correct. Only `past` can be used as a preposition.

#### `submodels` section {: .no-toc }

Coupled models may deploy the model components as multiple submodels.

This section of the _payu_ configuration file specifies the submodels, the configuration options required to execute the model component correctly and the location of all inputs required for this submodel. The configuration files specific to each submodel can be found in a `<name>/` subdirectory of the _control_ directory, where `<name>` is the value of the `name` field in the `submodel` section of `config.yaml`. 

#### `runlog` field {: .no-toc }

```yaml
runlog: true
```

When running an experiment,  if `runlog` is set to `true`, _payu_ saves a history of the experiment. It does this using _git_, by automatically committing changes to the control directory repository.

!!! warning
    This should not be changed as it is an essential part of the provenance of an experiment.<br>
    _payu_ updates the manifest files for every run, and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the _git_ history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts, and executables used in an experiment.

#### `userscripts` section {: .no-toc }

> They are used to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
They are used to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission, for example:
```

It might be good to add something like "for example/such as/including" to help clarify that the list isn't exhaustive.

Author: I didn't know the list wasn't exhaustive.

#### Miscellaneous {: .no-toc }

The following configuration settings should never require changing:

```yaml
stacksize: unlimited
qsub_flags: -W umask=027
```
<!--end:payu-advance-options-->

<!--start:payu-collate-->
#### Collate {: .no-toc }

Rather than outputting a single diagnostic file over the whole model horizontal grid, the ocean component [MOM](/models/model_components/ocean/#modular-ocean-model-mom) typically generates diagnostic outputs as tiles, each of which spans a portion of model grid.

The `collate` section in the `config.yaml` file controls the process that combines these smaller files into a single outputfile.

```yaml
# Collation
collate:
    exe: mppnccombine.spack
    restart: true
    mem: 4GB
    walltime: 1:00:00
    mpi: false
```
Restart files are typically tiled in the same way and will also be combined together if the `restart` field is set to`true`.
<!--end:payu-collate-->

<!--start:payu-component-configuration-->
## Edit a model components' configuration

> To modify the physics used by a model component, the input data or the model variables saved in the output, you will need to modify the model component's configuration files. These are located inside a subfolder of the _control_ directory, named according to the submodel's `name` specified in the `config.yaml` `submodels` section.

Reviewer: payu models don't necessarily have submodels, e.g. MOM standalone, OM3 etc are single exectuable

This means the _configuration_ definition can be tracked with git, and so is easy to back up and share.  It also optimises the use of different filesystems on high-performance computers. Finally, this layout ensures several _experiments_ that share common executables and input data can be run simultaneously.  

A representation of the data organisation for _payu_ is given in the following diagram:

<!-- Diagram created from Lucid chart: https://lucid.app/users/login#/login -->
<!-- It can be edited by any Lucid's member (free account), at this link: https://lucid.app/lucidchart/ccebf957-8915-4344-a832-426427451c00/edit?viewport_loc=-159%2C129%2C2067%2C1113%2C0_0&invitationId=inv_1c8cccfd-b20e-4b2f-977a-a74b0b8355ae -->

![payu directory structure](/assets/payu_directory_structure.svg){: class="example-img" loading="lazy"}

As shown in the diagram, the general layout of a _payu_-supported model run consists of two main directories:

- The _control_ directory contains the model configuration and is the directory from which the model run is started.  

>   This directory contains information to manage the simulation and the scientific options that define the algorithms used in the model component or the diagnostics saved by the model component. The simulation is orchestrated from a main `config.yaml` file contained in this directory. The files specific to each model component are either located directly in the _control_ directory if the model has one model component, or in subdirectories if the model has several model components. The `submodels` section of the `config.yaml` file specifies the name of the submodels and of the subdirectories containing the pertinent files. To modify these options please refer to the configurations documentation of the respective model component.

Reviewer: This paragraph is a bit long/verbose. Can we break it up or use dot points or something ?

<!--See the section on [modifying the PBS resources](#modify-pbs-resources) to learn how to change the _laboratory_ location. (Should the include be cut to allow adding this sentence and link?)-->

!!! tip

    On _Gadi_, it is good practice to put experiment _control_ directories in your `$HOME` directory as this is the only filesystem that is actively backed-up. There is a 10GB limit for home directories, but the _control_ directory only contains text files and symlinks, and so uses relatively little space (<1MB). The _laboratory_ directory is on `/scratch` which is optimised for fast reading and writing of large data and where there is adequate space available for large model output.

    If you decide to locate your _control_ directory under `/g/data`, be aware of [some complications](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/changing-project-codes-for-payu-control-directories-under-g-data/6566) linked to that choice.

Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two subdirectories of particular interest: 

> - _work_ &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates and removes directories and files in this directory upon successful completion of runs. It is left untouched in case of error to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure

Reviewer 4: I'd read the current text as suggesting the `work` directory is created at the end of each run. Would something like this be a little more explicit

```suggestion
- _work_ &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates this directory at the start of each run and removes it upon their successful completion. It is left untouched in case of error to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure
```

!!! warning
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might be deleted if not accessed for several days. All experiments which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_.

##### Output and restart files organisation

Within each of the _work_ and _archive_ directories, _payu_ automatically creates a unique subdirectory for each experiment. Within each experiment subdirectory, the output and restart subfolders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`. Model components are further separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

##### Error and output log files

**PBS output files**

When the model fails or completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively.

These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>

> To move these files to the _archive_ directory, use the following commmand:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the model fails or completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively. These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>

To move these files to the _archive_ directory, use the following commmand:
```

Reviewer: The formatting is a bit weird:

<img width="651" height="262" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/30f9e234-5d13-4e95-bcb4-7b57c55677e7" />

## Prerequisites for _payu_

- **NCI account**<br>
    Before running a _payu_ experiment, you need to [Set Up your NCI Account](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account).

- **Join NCI projects**<br>
    Join the following project by requesting membership on its NCI project page:

<!--start:projects-->
    - [vk83](https://my.nci.org.au/mancini/project/vk83/join)
<!--end:projects-->
    For more information on joining specific NCI projects, refer to [How to connect to a project](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/How+to+connect+to+a+project).

    !!! warning
        Different model configurations will likely require you to **join additional projects**. Please refer to the [Run a Model][Run a Model] page of your chosen model for the list of additional projects.

<!--start:access-payu-->
### Accessing _payu_

_Payu_ on _Gadi_ is available through a dedicated environment in the _vk83_ project.<br>
After joining the _vk83_ project, load the _payu_ module:

    module use /g/data/vk83/modules
    module load payu

To check that _payu_ is available, run:

    payu --version
<!--end:access-payu-->

## Run an experiment

### Get the model configuration

<!--start:get-config-payu-->

> To get a local copy of a configuration, you need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before downloading (cloning) a local copy of a configuration, you need to:
```

- Know the `<repository>` and `<branch>` name the configuration is stored under on GitHub. 
- Create where on Gadi to store all your _payu_ experiments, `<configurations-directory>`, typically a folder under `$HOME`. This directory must exist before running _payu_.
- Choose a directory name to store the experiment, `<control-directory>` (created by _payu_). The `control` directory is a git repository. Experiments are saved as branches in this repository, making it possible to use the same `control` directory for several experiments. For this reason, we recommend to always set the `<local-branch>`. For more information refer to this [payu tutorial](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/access-om2-payu-tutorial/1750#select-experiment-12).
- Choose a name for your experiment, `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment. Note that the experiment name will be formed using the _control_ directory's name and this `<local-branch>` name.

Then, you can get the chosen configuration using `payu clone`.
<!--end:get-config-payu-->

<!--start:payu-clone-example-->

> For example, if you want to do a sensitivity experiment in {{model}} using the configuration {{config_example}}. You decide the following:

Reviewer 4: Just a very small thing. I think "sensitivity experiment" complicates the example, and it could be clearer omitting it:
"For example, if you want to clone the configuration {{config_example}} for {{model}}, ..."

To test the configuration, execute the following command from within the `control` directory:

    payu run -f

This will submit a single [PBS job][PBS job] to the queue. 

!!! tip
    `payu run` will error out if a non-empty `work` directory for your experiment already exists (from a failed attempt or from running [`payu setup`].<br>
    The `-f` option to `payu run` lets the model run in all cases and delete any existing data under `work`.
<!--end:payu-test-config-->

<!--start:payu-run-experiment-->
### Run the experiment

An experiment consists of a series of sequential runs, with each run continuing from where the previous run ended.
_payu_ supports automatically running a fixed number of runs using the `-n` option:  

    payu run -n <number-of-runs>

This will run the configuration `number-of-runs` consecutive times for the configured run length. This way, the *total experiment length* will be `run-length * number-of-runs`. The `run-length` (i.e. the duration of each individual run) is defined in the configuration settings and its specification is model-dependent.

> For example, to run an experiment for a total of 50 years using a configuration with a 5-year _run length_, the `number-of-runs` should be set to `10`:

Reviewer 4: Related to @anton-seaice's comment [here](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-Hive-Docs/pull/1202#discussion_r3495677143), since we strongly suggest leaving the run length as 1 year, it might be best to use a 1 year run length in this example.

```yaml
# If submitting to a different project to your default, uncomment line below
# and replace PROJECT_CODE with appropriate code. This may require setting shortpath
# project: PROJECT_CODE

# Force payu to always find, and save, files in this scratch project directory
# shortpath: /scratch/PROJECT_CODE
```

For example, to run under the {{WG_project}}, uncomment the line beginning with `# project` by deleting the `#` symbol and replace `PROJECT_CODE` with `{{WG_project_code}}`:

```yaml
project: {{WG_project_code}}
```

For model configurations and output to be saved to a `/scratch` storage location other than `project` (or your default if `project` is not set) then also set `shortpath` to the desired path. 

!!! warning
    If changing the project providing the compute resources during an experiment, set the `shortpath` field so that it's the same for all runs of an experiment.
    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.
<!--end:payu-compute-storage-project-->

<!--start:payu-PBS-resources-->
### Modify PBS resources

> If the model has been altered and needs more time or memory to complete, or needs to be submitted under a different NCI project, you will need to modify the following options in the `config.yaml`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the model has been altered and needs more time or memory to complete, you will need to modify the following options in the `config.yaml`:
```

restart_freq: '50YS'
```

The most recent sequential restarts are retained, and only deleted after a permanently archived restart file has been produced.

??? note "When `restart_freq` is not a multiplier of the model's restart frequency"

    If `restart_freq` is not a multiplier of the model's restart frequency, _payu_ will keep the first restart passed `restart_freq`. For example, a model is set to write restart files every 3 years and produces restarts on the following dates:

    - restart000: 01/01/2000  
    - restart001: 01/01/2003  
    - restart002: 01/01/2006  
    - restart003: 01/01/2009  
    - restart004: 01/01/2012  
    - restart005: 01/01/2015

    If `restart_freq` is set to `5YS` (5 years), _payu_ will keep:

    - restart000: 01/01/2000  
    - restart002: 01/01/2006 (first restart date on or after 01/01/2005)  
    - restart004: 01/01/2012 (first restart date on or after 01/01/2011)  
    - restart005: 01/01/2015 (keeps immediate restarts before 01/01/2017)  

For more information, check [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#model).
<!--end:payu-restart-prune-->

<!--start:payu-advance-options-->

> ### _payu_ advance options

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### _payu_ options for advanced users
```

!!! warning
    The following sections in the `config.yaml` file control configuration options that are rarely modified, and often require a deeper understanding of how the model is structured to be safely changed.

#### `model` section {: .no-toc }

This section tells _payu_ which driver to use for the main `model` configuration and the location of all `input` files that are common to all its model components.

> The `name` field, for the model section, is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored. The `name` field is used for submodels (see below).

Reviewer 4: I think the top level `name` option selects the payu driver. @Qian-HuiChen  is that correct?

Author: @blimlim I've checked OM2 documentation:

---

This section tells payu which driver to use for the main model configuration (access-om2) and the location of all inputs that are common to all its [model components](https://docs.access-hive.org.au/models/access_models/access-om/#model-components-ACCESS-OM2).
```
name: common
model: access-om2
input: /g/data/ik11/inputs/access-om2/input_20201102/common_1deg_jra55
```
The name field is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored.

---

So `name` is ignored. It's `model` that selects the driver. That's what the previous sentence is trying to say. I've rewritten that part to make this more obvious.

Reviewer 4: Thanks! I'd gotten mixed up between the `name` and `model` fields

A representation of the data organisation for _payu_ is given in the following diagram:

<!-- Diagram created from Lucid chart: https://lucid.app/users/login#/login -->
<!-- It can be edited by any Lucid's member (free account), at this link: https://lucid.app/lucidchart/ccebf957-8915-4344-a832-426427451c00/edit?viewport_loc=-159%2C129%2C2067%2C1113%2C0_0&invitationId=inv_1c8cccfd-b20e-4b2f-977a-a74b0b8355ae -->

![payu directory structure](/assets/payu_directory_structure.svg){: class="example-img" loading="lazy"}

As shown in the diagram, the general layout of a _payu_-supported model run consists of two main directories:

- The _control_ directory contains the model configuration and is the directory from which the model run is started. This directory contains information to manage the simulation and the scientific options that define the algorithms used in the model component or the diagnostics saved by the model component. In the _control_ directory, you will find:

>      - `config.yaml` file: it is used to orchestrate the simulation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - The `config.yaml` file, which is used to orchestrate the simulation.
```

>      - model components' configuration files:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
     - Model components' configuration files:
```

>          - if the model has only one component: these files are located directly in the _control_ directory 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
         - if the model has only one component: these files are located directly in the _control_ directory. 
```

>          - if the model has several components: these files are in subdirectories. The `submodels` section of the `config.yaml` file specifies the name of the submodels and of the subdirectories containing the pertinent files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
         - if the model has several components, these files are in subdirectories. The `submodels` section of the `config.yaml` file specifies the name of the submodels and of the subdirectories containing the pertinent files.
```

       
            To modify the model components' options, please refer to the configurations documentation of the model.

> - The _laboratory_ directory contains all data from _payu_ experiments of the same model. By default, it is `/scratch/${PROJECT}/${USER}/<model_type>`. `${PROJECT}` and `${USER}` are environment variables on _Gadi_ that point to your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) and your username respectively. `<model_type>` defaults to {{model_type}} for the {{model}} model. This location can be changed using options in the `config.yaml` file. Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two subdirectories of particular interest: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The _laboratory_ directory contains all data from _payu_ experiments of the same model. By default, it is `/scratch/${PROJECT}/${USER}/<model_type>`. `${PROJECT}` and `${USER}` are environment variables on _Gadi_ that point to your [default project](/getting_started/set_up_nci_account/#change-default-project-on-gadi) and your username, respectively. `<model_type>` defaults to _{{model_type}}_ for the {{model}} model. This location can be changed using options in the `config.yaml` file. Inside the _laboratory_ directory, there are two subdirectories of particular interest: 
```

>     - _work_ &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates this directory at the start of each run and removes it upon their successful completion. It is left untouched in case of error to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure

Reviewer 3: "their successful completion". What is "their" referring to?
 
```suggestion
    - _work_ &rarr; for temporary storage of files needed by the model while it runs. _payu_ creates this directory at the start of each run and removes it upon their successful completion. It is left untouched in case of error to facilitate the identification of the cause of the model failure.
```

    - _archive_ &rarr; for storing the output following each successful run. The output, log and restart files are automatically transferred from _work_ to _archive_ upon successful completion of runs.
    
    The _archive_ and _work_ directories for an experiment are most easily accessed through the symbolic links created in the _control_ directory.

<!--See the section on [modifying the PBS resources](#modify-pbs-resources) to learn how to change the _laboratory_ location. (Should the include be cut to allow adding this sentence and link?)-->

!!! tip 

    Recommended location of _control_ and _laboratory_ on _Gadi_.

>     - _control_ directories: it is recommended to put them in your `$HOME` directory:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - _control_ directories. It is recommended to put these in your `$HOME` directory as this is the only filesystem that is actively backed-up. The 10GB quota should be sufficient as _control_ directories only contains text files and symlinks and, hence, occupy <1MB space.
```

>         - this is the only filesystem that is actively backed-up. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
       
```

>         - the quota is small (10GB) but sufficient. The _control_ directory only contains text files and symlinks, and so uses relatively little space (<1MB).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 
```

        If you decide to locate your _control_ directory under `/g/data`, be aware of [some complications](https://forum.access-hive.org.au/t/changing-project-codes-for-payu-control-directories-under-g-data/6566) linked to that choice.

>     - _laboratory_ directories: `/scratch` is recommended:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - _laboratory_ directories. For these, `/scratch` is recommended as it is optimised for fast reading and writing of large data, and adequate space is available for large model output.
```

>         - optimised for fast reading and writing of large data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

>         - adequate space available for large model output.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```

- Choose a name for your experiment, `<local-branch>`. It is recommended to choose a descriptive name, specific to your experiment. Note that the experiment name will be formed using the _control_ directory's name and this `<local-branch>` name.

Then, you can get the chosen configuration using `payu clone`.
<!--end:get-config-payu-->

<!--start:payu-clone-example-->
<!--This bit expect the host page to define the variables: model, config_example, github_configs, model_type-->
For example, if you want to run an experiment for {{model}} using the configuration {{config_example}}. You decide the following:

- `<repository>` and `<branch>`: base your experiment off the branch, **{{config_example}}**, from the repository, **{{github_configs}}**
- `<configurations-directory>`: store all your {{model}} configurations under **~/{{model}}/**
- `<local-branch>`: name your branch **expt1**. For a real case, a more explicit name is recommended.
- `<control-directory>`: store the configurations for this research project under **my-project-expts**. For a real case, a more explicit name is recommended.

> To get the configuration as chosen, run:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To get this configuration, run:
```

    <terminal-line>binary path:  /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/bin</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>input path:  /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/input</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>work path:  /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/work</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>archive path:  /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/archive</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updated metadata. Experiment UUID: 14058c5c-d0dd-49dd-841a-cbec42b7391e</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Added archive symlink to /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/archive/my-project-expts-expt1-14058c5c</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>To change directory to control directory run:</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>  cd my-project-expts</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

!!! tip
    Anyone using a configuration is advised to clone only a single branch (as shown in the example above) and not the entire repository.
<!--end:payu-clone-example-->

<!--start:payu-test-config-->
<!--This bit expects the host page to define the variables: model_type, model-->
### Test the configuration

> To verify everything is set correctly, it is recommended to first test the configuration as-is.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To verify everything is set correctly, it is recommended to first test the configuration as is.
```

    <terminal-line>input path: /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/input</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>work path: /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/work</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>archive path: /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/{{model_type}}/archive</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading input manifest: manifests/input.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading restart manifest: manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Loading exe manifest: manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up atmosphere</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up ocean</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up ice</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Setting up {{model.lower()}}</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Checking exe and input manifests</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Updating full hashes for 3 files in manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Creating restart manifest</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/restart.yaml</terminal-line>
    <terminal-line>Writing manifests/exe.yaml</terminal-line>
</terminal-window>

This command: 
  

>   - creates the _laboratory_ and _work_ directories based on the experiment configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Creates the _laboratory_ and _work_ directories based on the experiment configuration,
```

>   - generates manifests

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Generates manifests, and
```

>   - reports useful information to the user, such as the location of the _laboratory_ where the _work_ and _archive_ directories are located

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - Reports useful information to the user, such as the location of the _laboratory_ where the _work_ and _archive_ directories are located.
```

This can help to isolate issues such as permission problems accessing files and directories, missing files or malformed/incorrect paths.

To test the configuration, execute the following command from within the `control` directory:

    payu run -f

This will submit a single [PBS job][PBS job] to the queue. 

!!! failure

>     `payu run` will error out if a non-empty _work_ directory for your experiment already exists (from a failed attempt or from running `payu setup`).<br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    `payu run` will issue an error if a non-empty _work_ directory for your experiment already exists (from a failed attempt or from running `payu setup`).<br>
```

>     The `-f` option to `payu run` lets the model run in all cases and deletes any existing data under _work_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The `-f` option to `payu run` lets the model run in all cases and deletes any existing data in the _work_ directory.
```

```yaml
project: {{WG_project_code}}
```

For model configurations and output to be saved to a `/scratch` storage location other than `project` (or your default if `project` is not set) then also set `shortpath` to the desired path. 

!!! warning
    If changing the project providing the compute resources during an experiment, set the `shortpath` field so that it's the same for all runs of an experiment.
    Doing this will make sure the same `/scratch` location is used for the _laboratory_, regardless of which project is used to run the experiment.
<!--end:payu-compute-storage-project-->

<!--start:payu-PBS-resources-->
### Modify PBS resources

If the model has been altered and needs more time or memory to complete, you will need to modify the following options in the `config.yaml`:

```yaml
queue: normal
walltime: 3:00:00
mem: 1000GB
jobname: 1deg_jra55_ryf
```

These lines can be edited to change the [PBS directives](https://opus.nci.org.au/display/Help/PBS+Directives+Explained) for the [PBS job][PBS job].
<!--end:payu-PBS-resources-->

<!--start:payu-sync-->
### Syncing output data to long-term storage

> The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have been unaccessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer term storage.<br>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The _laboratory_ directory is typically under the `/scratch` storage on _Gadi_, where [files are regularly deleted once they have not been accessed for a period of time](https://opus.nci.org.au/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=156434436). For this reason, climate model outputs need to be moved to a location with longer-term storage.<br>
```

# longer term storage
sync:
    enable: False # set base_path below and change to true
    restart: True
    base_path: none # Final sync location will be <base_path>/<experiment_name>/
    exclude:
      - '*.nc.*'
      - 'iceh.????-??-??.nc'
```
To enable syncing, change `enable` to `True`, and set `base_path` to a location on `/g/data`. _payu_ will copy output and restart folders to `<base_path>/<experiment_name>` to avoid overwriting data from other experiments by mistake. A sensible `base_path` could be: `/g/data/${PROJECT}/${USER}/<model>`.
<!--end:payu-sync-->

<!--start:payu-restart-prune-->
### Pruning model restarts

By default, restart files are created at the end of each run, allowing subsequent simulations to resume from a previously saved model state. However, restart files can occupy significant disk space, and keeping all of them throughout an entire experiment is often not necessary. 

If disk space is limited, consider using _payu_'s restart files pruning feature, controlled by the `restart_freq` field of the `config.yaml`.
By default, every `restart_freq`, _payu_ removes intermediate restart files, keeping only:

> - restarts corresponding to the `restart_freq` interval  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Restarts corresponding to the `restart_freq` interval, and  
```

> - all restarts created since the most recently retained restart  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- All restarts created since the most recently retained restart. 
```

??? info "`model` and `submodel` sections"

    #### `model` section {: .no-toc }

    The `model` field tells _payu_ which driver to use for the configuration. 

    The `input` field gives the location of all input files that are common to all its model components, if any. The `input` field is omitted if there are no common input files.

    The `name` field, for the model section, is not actually used for the configuration run, so it can be safely ignored or omitted. The `name` field is used for submodels (see below).

    #### `submodels` section {: .no-toc }

    Coupled models may deploy the model components as multiple submodels.

    This section of the _payu_ configuration file specifies the submodels, the configuration options required to execute the model component correctly and the location of all inputs required for this submodel. The configuration files specific to each submodel can be found in a `<name>/` subdirectory of the _control_ directory, where `<name>` is the value of the `name` field in the `submodel` section of `config.yaml`. 

??? info "`runlog` field"

    #### `runlog` field {: .no-toc }

    ```yaml
    runlog: true
    ```

>     When running an experiment,  if `runlog` is set to `true`, _payu_ saves a history of the experiment. It does this using _git_, by automatically committing changes to the control directory repository.

Reviewer 3: Here `git` is in italics, i.e., _git_, but in above sections it is not, i.e., git. 
For consistency, I would change all instances to _Git_ as it is a proper noun.

    !!! warning
        This should not be changed as it is an essential part of the provenance of an experiment.<br>
        _payu_ updates the manifest files for every run, and relies on `runlog` to save this information in the _git_ history, so there is a record of all inputs, restarts, and executables used in an experiment.

??? info "`userscripts` section"

    #### `userscripts` section {: .no-toc }

    They are used to run scripts or subcommands at various stages of a _payu_ submission, for example:

    - `error` field: script is called if the model does not run correctly and exits with an error.
    - `run` field: script is called after each model run successful execution, but prior to archiving the model output. If using `payu -n` for automatic resubmission, it is run for each submission.
    - `sync` field: script is called at the start of the sync PBS job.
    
    For more information about specific `userscripts` fields, check the relevant section of [_payu_ Configuration Settings documentation](https://payu.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config.html#postprocessing).

??? info "`postscript` field"

    #### `postscript` field {: .no-toc }

>     Postprocessing scripts that run after _payu_ has completed all steps of each run (for example, with `payu run -n 10`, the postscript will run 10 times). Scripts that might alter the output directory, for example, can be run as postscripts. These run in PBS jobs separate from the main model simulation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Postprocessing scripts that run after _payu_ has completed all steps of each run. For example, with `payu run -n 10`, the postscript will run 10 times. Scripts that might alter the output directory, for example, can be run as postscripts. These run in PBS jobs separate from the main model simulation.
```

!!! warning
    Files on the `/scratch` drive, such as the _laboratory_ directory, might be deleted if not accessed for [some time](https://opus.nci.org.au/spaces/Help/pages/156434436/Gadi+scratch+File+Management). All experiments which are to be kept should be moved to `/g/data/` by enabling the `sync` step in _payu_.

#### Output and restart files organisation {: .no-toc}

Within each of the _work_ and _archive_ directories, _payu_ automatically creates a unique subdirectory for each experiment. Within each experiment subdirectory, the output and restart subfolders are called `outputXXX` and `restartXXX`, respectively, where _XXX_ is the run number starting from `000`. Model components are further separated into subdirectories within the output and restart directories.

#### Error and output log files {: .no-toc}

*PBS output files*

When the model fails or completes a run, PBS writes the standard output and error streams to two files inside the _control_ directory: `<jobname>.o<job-ID>` and `<jobname>.e<job-ID>`, respectively. These files usually contain logs about _payu_ tasks, and give an overview of the resources used by the job.<br>
<br/>

> To move these files to the _archive_ directory, use the following command:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To move these files to the _archive_ directory once the model has completed running, use the following command:
```
I'd add this as it's possible to kill your job by sweeping in the middle of a run

??? exemple "Example outputs from `payu status`"

    Example output from `payu status` for a running simulation:
    
    ```
        ========================================
        Run: 0
        ------------- Run Info -------------
        Job ID:            174067874.gadi-pbs
        Run ID:            fe6a9f5a508caf26d56b1eda6ef9409ca45626c0
        Stage:             model-run
        Current Expt Time: 2676-01-01T21:00:00
        Job File:          /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/access-esm/archive/test-dir-struct-test-dir-struct-f8f5d0f4/payu_jobs/0/run/174067874.gadi-pbs.json
        ======================================== 
    ```
    
    Example output from `payu status` for an archived simulation:

    
    ```
        ========================================
        Run: 8
          Job ID:            archive_example.gadi-pbs
          Run ID:            xxxx
          Stage:             archive
          Total Queue Time:  0h 1m 7s
          Model Finish Time: 1950-10-01T00:00:00
          Exit Status:       0 (Success)
          Model Exit Code:   0 (Success)
          Output Log:        \${HOME}/expt.o100
          Error Log:         \${HOME}/expt.3100

>           Job File:          /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER]/archive/expt-branch—6dhash/payu_jobs/8/run/archive_example.gadi-pbs.json

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
          Job File:          /scratch/\${PROJECT}/\${USER}/archive/expt-branch—6dhash/payu_jobs/8/run/archive_example.gadi-pbs.json
```
